Looking at anything that had to do with the ocean.
Well, you know, I've been a dabbler most of my life,
I guess. And I guess that's why I'll need to live two
or three lifetimes to do all the things that I'd
like to do. But one of the many things that I did as an
undergraduate was to work in a fish hatchery. And
I'd kind of had an interest in development, you
know, in biological development. And one could
most easily visualize
biological development with fish, eggs, and that
sort of thing. And so that was a real interesting
area of endeavor for me. What all this means is that
I'd had experience with fish hatchery work, which
means that I had experience with fish, which leads
to the fact that I thought that there might be some
diseases in fish that would be interesting. And so
I saw Leland after the meeting and I said, yeah, I
think I might have an idea on that. He said, he first
said, Well, Don, I believe your plate's full. He
said, you probably ought to get back to EIA. You've
done this pig thing.
Do whatever you want to, but I really don't, he
said, I don't see where. So I said, well, it's
something I'm kind of interested in. So being the
kind of person he was, he just let me go home and do
it. So I wrote a project, put together a project.
And then I got to thinking about it. You know, the
veterinary profession has sort of dropped the
ball on swine, on the swine industry.
I think this might be an area that the veterinary
profession ought to be involved in. So then I got to
talking it up among some of the other people in some
of the other departments. And I thought it might
strengthen the proposal if I got other people in
other departments involved in it. Well, most of
them said, yeah, Louis, put my name on there.
That's all right. I'll do that. So to kind of make a
long story short, I put together a proposal. that
involved all the major departments of the
college, and submitted it to the Sea Grant people.
Well, John wore many hats, and he was in charge of
the Sea Grant operation. Now, he may not even
remember me personally. I don't know whether he
does or not. But I put this proposal together and
submitted it to him, And he sent it to the people,
you know, the NOAA people, and that was something
they really were interested in. In fact, they got
very interested in it and gave it and funded it at a
fairly high level. Now, let's see.
Seems like that was around $250,000 or $300,000
that they funded. That's a large amount for Sea
Grant even today. Mm-hmm. Most of those type of
things, you get $30,000 to $40,000 and that's
about all. And I think that's about all they do now.
Well, I suggested that aquaculture was really the
wave of the future. And I still think it is. But
unfortunately, it hadn't developed to the extent
that I think it could have or should have. At any
rate, So that was my next thing to get involved in
aquatic research. And
let's see. I
kind of had an interest in, well, first of all,
Archie and Leland and myself, thought that a good
source of specimens and potential interest would
be the Parks and Wildlife Department in Austin. So
they said, well, why don't you call, ask me, why
don't you call, call some people in Austin and see
if they'd be interested in collaborating with us.
I've forgotten the name of the individual with
whom I talked at that time and I said, you know, I was
visiting with them on the phone and I said, We'd
like to run with the College of Veterinary
Medicine and we're kind of interested in looking
into the potential disease problems that fish may
have. And this is the part of the state that is
responsible for the state fish hatcheries and so
forth. And the person that I was talking to was, I
don't remember his official title, but he was in
charge of those fisheries and And I didn't know it
at the time, but they had been kind of under the gun
from the legislature as far as problems that were
happening in the hatcheries. But when I suggested
that fish may have some diseases, and that may be
part of the problems that they're having, boy, he
really became very defensive. And he said, fish
don't have diseases.
And I talked with him for a little bit. I said, you
gotta be kidding. He said, no, we don't have any.
See, the poor guy had apparently been under the gun
from his funding sources because of the problems
that he was having. But at any rate, he wasn't
wanting to collaborate with us. He wasn't wanting
to uncover any problems with their hatchery
systems. And so we, but we still did have the Sea
Grant people and then we got to working real
closely with the federal agency in Galveston. And
at that time, they were trying to develop shrimp
culture and were having some problems and some of
the problems that they were having were due to a
particular bacterium, Vibrio. The name doesn't
make much difference, but it's a bacterium. And
also about that time,
the college felt like that, and I concurred, felt
like that it would be good if we had a veterinarian,
a practicing practitioner who had some
experience with fish diseases. And so they did
find someone that had had some experience with him
and brought him in and gave him a pretty good salary
and that sort of thing. He was an individual that
had some, he just wasn't real easy to get along
with, with most people. And I guess that's putting
it kind of mildly, including Al Price. He and Al
didn't get along. He and another guy, Fred Maurer,
had come on board at that time, who was real Army
research-oriented. That's M-A-U-R-E-R. That's
correct. And he and Fred had numerous knockdowns.
I mean, they really, this fellow had a lot of
problems. He and, he just, He was kind of like a
rebellious adolescent in many respects. I won't
mention his name because I don't want to
incriminate him. Well, he's dead now, but I think
so. But at any rate, he didn't work out. And so...
while he was working on, while he was gonna assume
the helm on the aquatic stuff, I started looking
for other things to do research on. I was
interested in working with fish, but I was also
wanting to try to explore other areas. Well, when
he left then, I felt like I had an obligation to move
back to the aquatic area, and I did. And about that
time, let's see, There was, oh, just thinking of
the presidential succession, Earl Rutter, Jack
Williams, then Vandiver. Wait, Jarvis. Yeah,
well, there's another story about Jarvis and
let's see, Earl Rutter. Well, anyway, let me tell
you this brief story about Earl Rutter.
I had been a graduate student here. And I had just
become appointed on the faculty in the college,
and I was walking across the campus one day. And
he came to work early every morning. He came to work
about 7.30 or so. And I was walking across the
campus one day, and he said, Hello, Don, how are
you? That blew me away. I didn't. I didn't know why
he knew my name, but he apparently knew all of them.
He made it his business to know all the faculty
members by first name, and I guess that's true.
What do you think was the perception by the
veterinary faculty of Mr. Rutter? Oh, they held
him in high regard. They held him in very high
regard. And he didn't come over there and walk
around much, did he? No, no, no. That's what I
thought. No, he didn't. Now, the story of Highway 6
going both ways, I sat in on that meeting. I was
there at that meeting.
Quite frankly, I kind of agreed with him. Because
there were a lot of people that were expressing
dissatisfaction over trivial issues that really
didn't need to be, they didn't need to be. Yeah, I
understand the point he was trying to make far more
clearly now than I did then. Yeah. Because I've
been on both sides of that table. I hear you. I hear
you, yeah.
But to directly answer you, I know you're, you
know, I don't want to waste any more of your time
than necessary. No, no, no. But he was held in high
regard. Right. But I don't think, I'm not aware of
anyone, maybe not even Al Price, I'm not aware, he,
Apparently, Earl wasn't the sort of person that
you could just sit down and have coffee with. Not
very easily, no. Now, what about Jack Williams?
Did you all... Oh, yeah, thought very highly of
him. He was the kind of person that you could... In
fact, well, he was another one that... I remember
shopping in what used to be, you know,
Skaggs-Opperson over there. It's not... At the
Circle at Northgate? Yeah. And... I was shopping
in there and he again called me by my first name and
asked me how the family was and that sort of thing. I
never knew why
people at that level
go to the trouble of knowing about people at my
level at that time. But anyway, yeah, Jack
Williams was held in real high regard. And I think
you'll find that to be a consensus if you ask that
same question to any of these other people. All
right, now, it's during his time that George
Shelton, Dr. Price retires. George Shelton
becomes the new dean. Describe anything you
recall about the search and the feelings when he
came and how he began his task. Well, there were
mixed feelings about him. I mean,
it's sort of like a brotherhood was dissolved.
Because everybody knew each other well. He had
come out of a group of his contemporaries. That's
correct. In fact, I guess this doesn't speak very
well for graduate education at that time, but most
of the people that held graduate degrees at that
time were on each other's,
were directing each other's. I mean, it was a real
close brotherhood type thing. And really, I don't
think, some of it had some substance, but a lot of it
didn't have much substance to it. That's a side
issue, and maybe it's not even relevant. Maybe
it's not even important, but there's some quality
issues that quality wasn't as good as it could have
been. Did Dean Shelton make any changes? Yes.
Well, slowly, but he did. He
had a hard time initially.
Well, quite frankly, Leland didn't like him very
well. But he'll never say that and probably I
shouldn't be saying that. But he actually, I
think,
some people thought he's kind of dull, not too
bright really. I mean, that's what I mean is not too
bright. But he soon came across as an individual
that was pretty sly politically. Let's see, let me
add an editorial note here. Okay. When the search
was nearing its completion, I, as the chairman of
the search committee, went in to Dr. Jack
Williams, the president, and summarized for him
what we had done. And I told him that we had tried to
have a representative of every segment of the
veterinary medicine public. That is, there was a
former student and faculty and students and so
forth. And that when each of the interviewees had
come to the campus, they had had an interview
session with each group, with the vet faculty,
with the department heads, with the students, and
so forth. And then that I, as chairman, went back to
those groups and got each of them to rank all of the
interviewees and had given a point. They were to
rank them in order. And so I score. Williams sure
there were two people that had were ranked highest
and it was all their point score were almost
exactly the same and one was George Shelton who was
then the associate dean of veterinary medicine at
the University of Missouri and the other was a man
who had been the dean of veterinary medicine at
Ohio State and after a year and a half or two years he
and Ohio State had parted company angrily and
apparently he could tell told them where they
could go and what they could do when they got there I
had been very much attracted by his brilliance. I
thought he was exciting. And so when I went in to
summarize the evaluations for Dr. Williams, I
said, now this man from Ohio State will be
controversial. Some of his ideas are not
apparently that good, but some are really good and
some are exciting. And that place will be jumping.
There will be something going on all the time. I
mean, it will be. And some of them may make front
pages. He said, tell me about this other man. I
said, well, Dr. Shelton will be much more quiet,
much more reserved. There won't be any
excitement. There won't be any cataclysmic
changes, but things will just get gradually
better, I think. I think he will work well with the
public, particularly with the veterinary public
and so forth. Dr. Williams quickly said, I've got
enough damn excitement in my life, thanks to the
Board of Regents. And he said, let's go with this
man named Shelton. End of note. Well, I don't
remember... I don't remember very much about the
various people that were interviewing at that
time.
Shelton worked out to be fine. All right, after he
got here, how did his deaning relate to what you
were trying to do? See, we were in some turmoil at
that time. Leland Grumbles had stepped down and
Charlie Hall had taken over, the Charlie Hall
that's in our department. And Charlie and Leland
were very good friends until Charlie became
department head and then they started having
problems and part of the mix that was part of the
same mix that you know Al Price was having problems
at that time so our so the school was in sort of a
turmoil and
I'm saying things that I probably ought you know I
would not would not want to incriminate Charlie or
Leland or Al. These are just things that happen.
These are just things that happen. I have the
greatest respect for all of those people. I mean,
they're very, people whom I admire and they're
very good friends. Or, you know, in the case of Al,
was a very good friend. But there was a lot of
turmoil.
And so, what I'm about to say is, George came on
board, he was there about six months, and Charlie
decided he wanted to step down. Didn't want to be
department head anymore. So they did an extensive
department head search. You may recall, I don't
know whether you were here or whether you would
have been in the loop with department head
searches or not, but they did an extensive
department head search, and apparently no one, no
one had taken over.
George came to me one day just out of the clear blue
and said Don I need somebody to lead this
department I said gee I said I haven't had any
administrative experience he said well my back's
to the wall I really need somebody to help me said if
you if you would might said this can be an interim
type thing in fact it probably should be I said Dr.
Shelton I really I'm reluctant to do this I don't
know I've never I said I've been in the laboratory
most of my life and he said well I said Leland and and
Charlie both recommended you and I'd sure
appreciate it if you'd consider doing it so I so I
did I acted in that fashion for I guess a year and a
half Describe what it was like to be the interim
department head. Scary. Scary to me. What were the
primary worries, concerns? Well, there were a lot
of things that were wrong that I felt like a true
department head would need to correct. And I
didn't know how long I was going to be there, and I
knew that I was going to have to be moving back to,
you know. So that, I'd be moving back to the, you
know, I don't, mean I'd be moving back to the
trenches to use the vernacular and I didn't want to
do anything because I had just about everyone I
felt everyone was a friend and but but many of them
weren't doing what I felt like they should be doing
and we had I mean we had problems secretarial
problems and you know various types of problems
like that and I was really afraid of that situation
um So then I, you know, for about two or three
months, I kind of really agonized over those
problems. And it's probably, that's probably the
reason why I, you know, I'm not an innate, innately
good administrator because of the, because I
don't know that I am. I don't know whether I am or
not, but. What did you find for, of the realities
you had to cope with? Okay, first of all, I had to
fire a secretary. I did that. I did it and I went to
sleep, slept fine. I had to suggest to an
individual, I mean a faculty member, that they
probably ought to move along because they're not
doing what they need to be doing. It's in their best
career interest to move along because this
environment is probably not good for them. I mean,
I had tears. It was really a tough thing to do, but I
said, I'm sorry. you're not gonna be getting
tenure. And you may as well consider that right
now. And then there was some of the old timers that
had been there for some time that I felt like that
they oughta be doing something different than
what they were doing. And they didn't like it, but I
felt like that they really had to do it. And in fact,
one of them went to Shelton, And Shelton
apparently told him that I was right. So he backed
you? Yeah, he backed me completely, and that was
good. Were there any pleasant moments,
satisfying moments? Oh, yeah, yeah, sure, sure. I
think, you know,
you pass along, you know, sometimes you receive a
gift and you just look for opportunities to I mean
sometimes you receive a good thing through the
goodness of somebody's actions or thoughts or
something and I feel like I had the chance to do that
on a couple of occasions the people ultimately
left here but they were much I feel like by my giving
them a break and you know encouraging them in some
way I think they left here better people than than
they would have been and that that was really it
felt good um and in terms of hours that the duties
god I never realized how much was there's a lot of
paperwork maybe more than maybe because I was
somewhat compulsive because I really you know I
really tried to get everything outlined and
really tried to well it's sort of like a Well, I
guess sort of like a new bride or something. You
really want to try to do everything as best you can.
Now, did anybody, while you were department head,
pull out the old card about you're not a DVM? No. The
one individual who I said weren't going to get
tenure kind of intimated that. But no, we really
didn't. All right, and then did you seek the
department headship on a permanent basis, or did
you go back and say, thank you? Well, I didn't seek
it, but I would have been happy to serve there for a
while longer. They continued, and I suggested
that they continue with the search. And there were
two people that were interested in the project, in
the position and I thought they were going to come.
One person, one of the best persons that would have
been a very, in my opinion, would have been a very
good department head didn't come and the next best
person uh did come and he was worked out to be pretty
good too I'm talking about Ian Tizard Ian was Ian
Tizard E-A-N no I-A-N I-A-N Tizard T-I-Z-A-R-D
T-I-Z-A-R-D yeah he he he was my all right and he was
here is he still here yeah he's still on the faculty
and he served he served for a number of years
actually uh Let's see, about five years ago, I'm
talking about five years ago. And you went back to
the full-time faculty, and what were your tasks
then? Well, the people over in the Research
Foundation, when they heard that I had taken the
interim, I don't know if you know Jimmy Dodd or not,
but he was sort of the person that did a lot of the
groundwork for research proposals and so forth.
He said he was disappointed that I went into the
administration because he thought that I'd never
be able to recover my research. I would never be
able to get, by losing stride, I would never get
back to the, and I felt like that, kind of felt like
that too, but
sort of shortly after I got back, I wrote a project
again in the aquaculture area, one of the USDA
competitive grants and got right back in there.
All right so this is now in the about 80? About 81,
82.
Now let's go back to the campus-wide
administration. You had positive words about Dr.
Williams and Jarvis Miller becomes president
after him.
you said you had a story to well there's I I don't
know you know uh yeah I'm gonna I'm gonna mention it
see Jarvis used to be uh uh director of the
experiment station for a while and Jarvis and John
Calhoun um I got the impression that they didn't
have much use for each other well see Calhoun
resigned when the day Jarvis was appointed Okay,
I'm not surprised at that. And then Jarvis
replaced him with Mack Prescott as the vice
president for academic affairs. Okay, okay. Cuz
we didn't call it provost then. You're right,
right. I was in a meeting one time. The purpose was,
see, our program at the vet school was one of the
larger programs, at one time, was one of the larger
programs in Sea Grant. and John was in charge of Sea
Grant and actually we had more to do with fisheries
projects than the Department of Wildlife
Fisheries did in Sea Grant and so
it also most of the people in the vet school held an
experiment halftime experiment station
appointment so
Jarvis was kind of looking out for the people in
wildlife fisheries and kind of looking out for the
people in vet medicine as far as Sea Grant was
concerned and John was trying to do the same thing
only they had had different perspectives on the
way that it should be handled and so the two of them
called a meeting a joint meeting that involved the
Sea Grant people, the Sea Grant investigators,
you know, me and several of the people out there at
that school, and the people in Wildlife History
Sciences, and we had a joint meeting. And, oh gosh,
I can't remember all the verbiage that went
around, but...
John said something about, well, the vet school
ought not to have all this stuff on fish. That's
really the domain of the Wildlife Fishery Science
Department. And Jarvis turned over to me and
looked at me and asked me, he said, Dr. Lewis, do you
feel that way? I mean, I was on the spot. I said,
well, I think we just have to let the chips fall
where they may. I think that you know that I'm not a
veterinarian, but I think that... that any
matters that have to do with animal health is
logically part of the training of the veterinary
profession. And it's time that the veterinary
profession, I don't remember my exact words, but
the veterinary profession should be encouraged
to be involved in health care of fish just like
they're involved in health. Their training leads
to that. Well, I don't know whether that was, I
don't know what what the what impressions were led
left as a result of those comments or what but about
well six months later I heard that Jarvis is going
to be the president and that and and I didn't know
for sure I didn't know I really didn't know what
happened to John because someone else took over
secret activities at that time. Yeah. Oh, well, I
don't really know who that was. Was it Bob Berg?
Worth Nallen? Worth Nallen, I believe, or Bob Berg
was involved in it.